boards: dptechnics: Add support for Walter board (#73351)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: boards/dptechnics/walter/doc/index.rst

.. _walter:

DPTechnics Walter
#################

Overview
********

Walter is a compact IoT development board that combines an Espressif ESP32-S3 SoC
with a Sequans Monarch 2 GM02SP LTE-M/NB-IoT/GNSS modem.

To help you get the most out of Walter, we have published the `schematic`_ and the

> `KiCAD footprint`_, along with our `datasheet`_ which describes all pins and test pads.

Reviewer: this is the zephyr documentation, not DPTechnics' :) Please refrain from using "we" this way as this is confusing/inappropriate. Please use a more neutral tone to enumerate the list of external resources available to the reader.

Author: Thanks for the feedback, we didn't mean to cause confusion here :). Fixed!

| RADIO      | on-board   | modem_cellular                      |
+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+

Prerequisites
-------------

Espressif HAL requires WiFi and Bluetooth binary blobs in order work. Run the command
below to retrieve those files.

.. code-block:: console

   west blobs fetch hal_espressif

.. note::

   It is recommended running the command above after :file:`west update`.

Building & Flashing
*******************

Simple boot
===========

The board could be loaded using the single binary image, without 2nd stage bootloader.
It is the default option when building the application without additional configuration.

.. note::

   Simple boot does not provide any security features nor OTA updates.

MCUboot bootloader
==================

User may choose to use MCUboot bootloader instead. In that case the bootloader
must be build (and flash) at least once.

There are two options to be used when building an application:

1. Sysbuild
2. Manual build

.. note::

   User can select the MCUboot bootloader by adding the following line
   to the board default configuration file.
   ```
   CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y

>    ```

Reviewer 2: @vThibo, please convert the above to:
```
   .. code:: cfg
      CONFIG_BOOTLOADER_MCUBOOT=y
```

Build and flash applications as usual (see :ref:`build_an_application` and
:ref:`application_run` for more details).

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: walter/esp32s3/procpu
   :goals: build

The usual ``flash`` target will work with the ``walter`` board
configuration. Here is an example for the :ref:`hello_world`
application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: walter/esp32s3/procpu
   :goals: flash

Open the serial monitor using the following command:

.. code-block:: shell

   west espressif monitor

After the board has automatically reset and booted, you should see the following
message in the monitor:

.. code-block:: console

   ***** Booting Zephyr OS vx.x.x-xxx-gxxxxxxxxxxxx *****
   Hello World! walter/esp32s3/procpu

Debugging
*********

ESP32-S3 support on OpenOCD is available upstream as of version 0.12.0.
Download and install OpenOCD from `OpenOCD`_.

ESP32-S3 has a built-in JTAG circuitry and can be debugged without any additional chip. Only an USB cable connected to the D+/D- pins is necessary.

Further documentation can be obtained from the SoC vendor in `JTAG debugging
for ESP32-S3`_.

> Here is an example for building the :ref:`hello_world` application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example for building the :zephyr:code-sample:`hello_world` application.
```

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: walter/esp32s3/procpu
   :goals: build flash

> You can debug an application in the usual way. Here is an example for the :ref:`hello_world` application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can debug an application in the usual way. Here is an example for the :zephyr:code-sample:`hello_world` application.
```

.. _walter:

DPTechnics Walter
#################

Overview

> ********
> Walter is a compact IoT development board that combines an Espressif ESP32-S3 SoC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
********

Walter is a compact IoT development board that combines an Espressif ESP32-S3 SoC
```

- Integrated SIM card
- Nano-SIM card slot
- u.FL RF connectors for GNSS and 5G antennas

Inputs & outputs:

- 24 GPIO pins for application use
- UART, SPI, I²C, CAN, I²S, and SD available on any of the GPIO pins
- ADC, DAC, and PWM integrated in ESP32-S3
- 3.3 V software-controllable output
- USB Type-C connector for flashing and debugging
- 22 test points for production programming and testing
- On-board reset button

Power supply

- 5.0 V via USB Type-C
- 3.0 - 5.5 V via Vin pin
- Not allowed to use both power inputs simultaneously
- Designed for extremely low quiescent current

Form factor

- Easy to integrate via 2.54 mm headers
- 55 mm x 24.8 mm board dimensions
- Pin and footprint compatible with EOL Pycom GPy
- Breadboard friendly

Connections and IOs
===================

.. figure:: img/pinout.jpg
   :align: center
   :alt: Walter pinout diagram

   Walter pinout diagram (Credit: DPTechnics bv)

Supported Features
==================

Current Zephyr's Walter board supports the following features:

+------------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Interface  | Controller | Driver/Component                    |

> +============+============+=====================================+
> +------------+------------+-------------------------------------+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+============+============+=====================================+
```

@sylvioalves not a big deal but this looks like it's broken in all ESP32 boards :)

<img width="407" alt="image" src="https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/assets/128251/6db24e29-9eb0-431f-a43c-cbb8f7398483">

Reviewer 2: #74308

.. _walter:

DPTechnics Walter
#################

Overview
********
Walter is a compact IoT development board that combines an Espressif ESP32-S3 SoC
with a Sequans Monarch 2 GM02SP LTE-M/NB-IoT/GNSS modem.

To help you get the most out of Walter, we have published the `schematic`_ and the
`KiCAD footprint`_, along with our `datasheet`_ which describes all pins and test pads.

> 

Reviewer 2: Remove extra line.

- 16 MiB quad SPI flash memory
- 2 MiB quad SPI PSRAM
- 150 Mbps 802.11 b/g/n Wi-Fi 4 with on-board PCB antenna
- 2 Mbps Bluetooth 5 Low Energy with on-board PCB antenna

Sequans Monarch 2 GM02SP modem:

- Dual-mode LTE-M / NB-IoT (NB1, NB2)
- 3GPP LTE release 14 (Upgradable up to release 17)
- Ultra-low, deep-sleep mode in eDRX and PSM
- Adaptive +23 dBm, +20 dBm and +14 dBm output power
- Integrated LNA and SAW filter for GNSS reception
- Assisted and non-assisted GNSS with GPS and Galileo constellations
- Integrated SIM card
- Nano-SIM card slot
- u.FL RF connectors for GNSS and 5G antennas

Inputs & outputs:

- 24 GPIO pins for application use
- UART, SPI, I²C, CAN, I²S, and SD available on any of the GPIO pins
- ADC, DAC, and PWM integrated in ESP32-S3
- 3.3 V software-controllable output
- USB Type-C connector for flashing and debugging
- 22 test points for production programming and testing
- On-board reset button

Power supply

- 5.0 V via USB Type-C
- 3.0 - 5.5 V via Vin pin
- Not allowed to use both power inputs simultaneously
- Designed for extremely low quiescent current

Form factor

- Easy to integrate via 2.54 mm headers
- 55 mm x 24.8 mm board dimensions

> - Pin- and footprint-compatible with EOL Pycom GPy

Reviewer 2: I suggest removing the extra `-`:
`Pin and footprint compatible with EOL Pycom GPy`
